----
### Air Polutants
-------
We have defined air pollution and the composition of air. We now turn attention to the various air pollutants that can impact the 
quality of air thereby affecting the equilibrium  in the ecological cycle or the well being of humans, plants or other organisms -that is causing air pollution. It should be noted that it's the quantity (or concentration) of a chemical in the air that makes the difference between "harmless" and "pollution." Carbon dioxide (CO2), for example, is present in the air around you at a typical concentration of less than 0.05 percent and breathing it in usually does no harm (you breathe it out all day long); but air with an extremely high concentration of carbon dioxide (say, 5–10 percent) is toxic. Any gas or particles could qualify as pollution if it reached a high enough concentration to do harm. 

<p>In addition we conclude that the phenomenon of air pollution usually involves a sequence of events: the generation of pollutants
at and their release from a source; their transport and transformation in  the atmosphere; and their effects on human beings, materials, and ecosystems</p>

-----
#### Common Anthropogenic  Pollutants
----

<p><strong>Sulfur dioxide:</strong> Coal, petroleum, and other fuels are often impure and contain sulfur as well as organic (carbon-based) compounds. When sulfur (spelled "sulphur" in some countries) burns with oxygen from the air, sulfur dioxide (SO2) is produced. Coal-fired power plants are the world's biggest source of sulfur-dioxide air pollution, which contributes to smog, acid rain, and health problems that include lung disease.</p>
<p><strong>Carbon monoxide:</strong>  This highly dangerous gas forms when fuels have too little oxygen to burn completely. It spews out in car exhausts and it can also build up to dangerous levels inside your home if you have a poorly maintained gas boiler, stove, or fuel-burning appliance. (Always fit a carbon monoxide detector if you burn fuels indoors.)</p>
<p><strong>Carbon dioxide:</strong>  This gas is central to everyday life and isn't normally considered a pollutant: we all produce it when we breathe out and plants such as crops and trees need to "breathe" it in to grow. However, carbon dioxide is also a greenhouse gas released by engines and power plants. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, it's been building up in Earth's atmosphere and contributing to the problem of global warming and climate change.</p>
<p><strong>Nitrogen oxides:</strong> Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and nitrogen oxide (NO) are pollutants produced as an indirect result of combustion, when nitrogen and oxygen from the air react together. Nitrogen oxide pollution comes from vehicle engines and power plants, and plays an important role in the formation of acid rain, ozone and smog. Nitrogen oxides are also "indirect greenhouse gases" (they contribute to global warming by producing ozone, which is a greenhouse gas).</p>
<p><strong>Volatile organic compounds (VOCs):</strong> These carbon-based (organic) chemicals evaporate easily at ordinary temperatures and pressures, so they readily become gases. That's precisely why they're used as solvents in many different household chemicals such as paints, waxes, and varnishes. Unfortunately, they're also a form of air pollution: they're believed to have long-term (chronic) effects on people's health and they also play a role in the formation of ozone and smog.</p>
<p><strong>Particulates: </strong>These are the sooty deposits in air pollution that blacken buildings and cause breathing difficulties. Particulates of different sizes are often referred to by the letters PM followed by a number, so PM10 means soot particles of less than 10 microns (10 millionths of a meter or 10µm in diameter). In cities, most particulates come from traffic fumes.</p>
<p><strong>Ozone: </strong>Also called trioxygen, this is a type of oxygen gas whose molecules are made from three oxygen atoms joined together (so it has the chemical formula O3), instead of just the two atoms in conventional oxygen (O2). In the stratosphere (upper atmosphere), a band of ozone ("the ozone layer") protects us by screening out harmful ultraviolet radiation (high-energy blue light) beaming down from the Sun. At ground level, it's a toxic pollutant that can damage health. It forms when sunlight strikes a cocktail of other pollution and is a key ingredient of smog (see box below).</p>
<p><strong>Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs):</strong> Once thought to be harmless, these gases were widely used in refrigerators and aerosol cans until it was discovered that they damaged Earth's ozone layer. We discuss this in more detail down below.</p>
<p><strong>Unburned hydrocarbons:</strong> Petroleum and other fuels are made of organic compounds based on chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms. When they burn properly, they're completely converted into harmless carbon dioxide and water; when they burn incompletely, they can release carbon monoxide or float into the air in their unburned form, contributing to smog.</p>
<p><strong>Lead and heavy metals:</strong> Lead and other toxic "heavy metals" can be spread into the air either as toxic compounds or as aerosols (when solids or liquids are dispersed through gases and carried through the air by them) in such things as exhaust fumes and the fly ash (contaminated waste dust) from incinerator smokestacks.</p>
